In **Windows**, most people use tools like File Explorer to find and edit files. It's more visual, so you click around to get things done.

In **Linux**, the terminal is a powerful tool. You can type a few commands to find, edit, or even modify many files at once—without opening a separate program like Notepad or Word. For example:

- You can search for text in files (`grep`).
- Change parts of a file quickly (`sed`).
- Or combine commands to process tons of files in seconds.

The terminal is faster and more efficient, especially for repetitive tasks or working with lots of files. In Windows, tools like PowerShell  or Command Prompt can give you similar features, but Linux is naturally built for this style of work.

## Create, Move, and Copy

Next, let us work with files and directories and learn how to create, rename, move, copy, and delete. First, let us create an empty file and a directory. We can use `touch` to create an empty file and `mkdir` to create a directory.

The syntax for this is the following:

#### Syntax - touch

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ touch <name>
```

#### Syntax - mkdir

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mkdir <name>
```

In this example, we name the file `info.txt` and the directory `Storage`. To create these, we follow the commands and their syntax shown above.

#### Create an Empty File

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ touch info.txt
```

#### Create a Directory

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mkdir Storage
```

We may want to have specific directories in the directory, and it would be very time-consuming to create this command for every single directory. The command `mkdir` has an option marked `-p` to add parent directories.

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mkdir -p Storage/local/user/documents
```

We can look at the whole structure after creating the parent directories with the tool `tree`.

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ tree .

.
├── info.txt
└── Storage
    └── local
        └── user
            └── documents

4 directories, 1 file
```

We can also create files directly in the directories by specifying the path where the file should be stored. The trick is to use the single dot (`.`) to tell the system that we want to start from the current directory. So the command for creating another empty file looks like this:

#### Create userinfo.txt

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ touch ./Storage/local/user/userinfo.txt
```

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ tree .

.
├── info.txt
└── Storage
    └── local
        └── user
            ├── documents
            └── userinfo.txt

4 directories, 2 files
```

With the command `mv`, we can move and also rename files and directories. The syntax for this looks like this:

#### Syntax - mv

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mv <file/directory> <renamed file/directory>
```

First, let us rename the file `info.txt` to `information.txt` and then move it to the directory `Storage`.

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mv info.txt information.txt
```

Now let us create a file named `readme.txt` in the current directory and then copy the files `information.txt` and `readme.txt` into the `Storage/` directory.

#### Create readme.txt

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ touch readme.txt
```

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ mv information.txt readme.txt Storage/
```

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ tree .

.
└── Storage
    ├── information.txt
    ├── local
    │   └── user
    │       ├── documents
    │       └── userinfo.txt
    └── readme.txt

4 directories, 3 files
```

Let us assume we want to have the `readme.txt` in the `local/` directory. Then we can copy them there with the paths specified.

#### Copy readme.txt

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cp Storage/readme.txt Storage/local/
```

Now we can check if the file is thereby using the tool `tree` again.

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ tree .

.
└── Storage
    ├── information.txt
    ├── local
    │   ├── readme.txt
    │   └── user
    │       ├── documents
    │       └── userinfo.txt
    └── readme.txt

4 directories, 4 files
```


## Concatenation with cat

The cat command followed by a filename will display the contents of that file, but to create a file, we follow the cat command with a redirect, denoted with the > symbol, and a name for the file we want to create. Here’s an example:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cat > hackingskills 
Hacking is the most valuable skill set of the 21st century!
```

When you press enter, Linux will go into interactive mode and wait for you to start entering content for the file. This can be puzzling because the prompt disappears, but if you simply begin typing, whatever you enter will go into the file (in this case, hackingskills). Here, I entered Hacking is the most valuable skill set of the 21st century!. To exit and return to the prompt, I press ctrl-D. Then, when I want to see what’s in the file hackingskills, I enter the following:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cat hackingskills 
Hacking is the most valuable skill set of the 21st century!
```

If you don’t use the redirect symbol, Linux will spit back the contents of your file. To add, or append, more content to a file, you can use the cat command with a double redirect (>>), followed by whatever you want to add to the end of the file. Here’s an example:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ >cat >> hackingskills 
Everyone should learn hacking
```

Linux once again goes into interactive mode, waiting for content to append to the file. When I enter Everyone should learn hacking and press ctrl-D, I am returned to the prompt. Now, when I display the contents of that file with cat, I can see that the file has been appended with Everyone should learn hacking, as shown here:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cat hackingskills 
Hacking is the most valuable skill set of the 21st century! Everyone should learn hacking
```

If I want to overwrite the file with new information, I can simply use the cat command with a single redirect again, as follows:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cat > hackingskills 
Everyone in IT security without hacking skills is in the dark

itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ cat hackingskills 
Everyone in IT security without hacking skills is in the dark
```

As you can see here, Linux goes into interactive mode, and I enter the new text and then exit back to the prompt. When I once again use cat to see the content of the file, I see that my previous words have been overwritten with the latest text.

## Renaming a File 
Unfortunately, Linux doesn’t have a command intended solely for renaming a file, as Windows and some other operating systems do, but it does have the mv (move) command. The mv command can be used to move a file or directory to a new location or simply to give an existing file a new name. To rename *newfile* to *newfile2*, you would enter the following

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ > mv newfile newfile2 

itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ ls 
oldfile newfile2
```

## Removing a File

To remove a file, you can simply use the rm command, like so:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ rm newfile2
```

If you now do a long listing on the directory, you can confirm that the file has been removed.

## Removing a Directory

The command for removing a directory is similar to the `rm` command for removing files but with dir (for directory) appended, like so:

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ rmdir newdirectory 
rmdir:failed to remove 'newdirectory': Directory not empty
```