In the previous section, we explored how to use redirection to send the output of one program into another for further processing. Now, let's talk about reading files directly from the command line, without needing to open a text editor.

There are two powerful tools for this - `more` and `less`. These are known as pagers, and they allow you to view the contents of a file interactively, one screen at a time. While both tools serve a similar purpose, they have some differences in functionality, which we'll touch on later.

Using `more` and `less`, you can easily scroll through large files, search for text, and navigate forward or backward without modifying the file itself. This is especially useful when you're working with large logs or text files that don't fit neatly into one screen.

The goal for this section is to learn how to filter content and handle the redirected output from previous commands. But before we dive into filtering, we need to become familiar with some essential tools and commands that are specifically designed to make filtering more efficient and powerful.

Before we start filtering the output of commands, let’s explore a few foundational tools that will help you efficiently sift through and manipulate text. These tools are crucial when working with large amounts of data or when you need to automate tasks that involve searching, sorting, or processing information.

Let's look at some examples to understand how these tools work in practice.

```powershell
itsashuotf@htb[/htb]$ >rm newfile2
```