Regular expressions (`RegEx`) are like the art of crafting precise blueprints for searching patterns in text or files. They allow you to find, replace, and manipulate data with incredible precision. Think of RegEx as a highly customizable filter that lets you sift through strings of text, looking for exactly what you need—whether it's analyzing data, validating input, or performing advanced search operations.

At its core, a regular expression is a sequence of characters and symbols that together form a search pattern. These patterns often involve special symbols called metacharacters, which define the structure of the search rather than representing literal text. For example, metacharacters allow you to specify whether you're searching for digits, letters, or any character that fits a certain pattern.

RegEx is available in many programming languages and tools, such as grep or sed, making it a versatile and powerful tool in a our toolkit.

---

## Grouping

Among other things, regex offers us the possibility to group the desired search patterns. Basically, regex follows three different concepts, which are distinguished by the three different brackets:
### Grouping Operators


Suppose we use the `OR` operator. The regex searches for one of the given search parameters. In the next example, we search for lines containing the word `my` or `false`. To use these operators, you need to apply the extended regex using the `-E` option in grep.

|**#**|**Operator**|**Description**|
|---|---|---|
|1|`(a)`|Round brackets (parentheses) are used for grouping parts of a regex. They allow applying quantifiers to entire expressions and also enable capturing groups.|
|2|`[a-z]`|Square brackets define character classes. They specify a set of characters to match, e.g., `[a-z]` matches any lowercase letter from 'a' to 'z'.|
|3|`{1,10}`|Curly brackets define quantifiers. They specify how many times the preceding pattern should repeat. `{1,10}` means the pattern must appear at least once but no more than 10 times.|
|4|`\|`|The OR operator. It allows matching one pattern or another. For example, `cat\|dog` matches either "cat" or "dog".|
|5|`.*`|A combination of `.` (which matches any character) and `*` (which means "zero or more times"). It allows matching any sequence of characters (including an empty sequence).|

#### OR operator

```powershell
cry0l1t3@htb:~$ grep -E "(my|false)" /etc/passwd

lxd:x:105:65534::/var/lib/lxd/:/bin/false
pollinate:x:109:1::/var/cache/pollinate:/bin/false
mysql:x:116:120:MySQL Server,,:/nonexistent:/bin/false
```

Since one of the two search parameters always occurs in the three lines, all three lines are displayed accordingly. However, if we use the `AND` operator, we will get a different result for the same search parameters.

#### AND operator

```powershell
cry0l1t3@htb:~$ grep -E "(my.*false)" /etc/passwd

mysql:x:116:120:MySQL Server,,:/nonexistent:/bin/false
```

Basically, what we are saying with this command is that we are looking for a line where we want to see both `my` and `false`. A simplified example would also be to use `grep` twice and look like this:

```powershell
cry0l1t3@htb:~$ grep -E "my" /etc/passwd | grep -E "false"

mysql:x:116:120:MySQL Server,,:/nonexistent:/bin/false
```

---

