## Environment Variables

An environment variable is **a user-definable value that can affect the way running processes will behave on a computer**. Environment variables are part of the environment in which a process runs. To create your own variables in system.

There are two types of environment variables: 
1. User Environment Variables (Set for each User) 
2. System Environment Variables (Set for Everyone)

The TERM environment variable is **used for terminal handling**. It lets DB-Access (and other character-based applications) recognize and communicate with the terminal that you are using. Specifies the terminal type.

In Linux, There are two states of Environment Variables
1. Temporary
2. Permanent

### Temporary environment variables

You can add a location to your path the way you create throw-away variables. It works, but only as long as the shell you used to modify your system path remains open. For instance, open a Bash shell and modify your system path:

```bash
$ export PATH=$PATH:/home/seth/bin
```

Confirm the result:

```bash
$ echo $PATH
PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin:/home/seth/.local/bin:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin
```

Close the session:

```bash
$ exit
```

Open a new one and take a look at the **PATH** variable:

```bash
$ echo $PATH
PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin:/home/seth/.local/bin:/snap/bin
```

This variable has reverted to its default state because **PATH** isn’t getting set with each new shell. For that, you must configure your variables to load any time a shell is launched.

### Permanent environment variables

You can set your own persistent environment variables in your shell configuration file, the most common of which is **~/.bashrc**. If you’re a system administrator managing several users, you can also set environment variables in a script placed in the **/etc/profile.d** directory.

The syntax for setting a variable by configuration file is the same as setting a variable in your shell:

```bash
export PATH=$PATH:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin
```

Close the current shell, or else force it to load the updated config:

```bash
$ . ~/.bashrc
```

Finally, take another look at your system path:

```bash
$ echo $PATH
PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin:/home/seth/.local/bin:/snap/bin:/home/seth/bin
```

It is now set correctly to include your additional custom directory.

Here’s a quick comparison of the methods we’ve discussed:

| Method                       | Pros                                           | Cons                                       |
| ---------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Bash `export`                | Simple, available in all bash sessions         | Variables not permanent                    |
| `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile` | Makes variables permanent                      | Requires editing shell configuration files |
| Different shell environments | May provide more features                      | Requires learning a new shell              |
| Third-party tools            | Simplifies managing project-specific variables | Adds an extra dependency                   |